When most of us become ill, we either
blame our bodies or others for our plight.
But Peter Fairfield says that illness
is an invitation to make friends with our bodies
and that there are spiritual benefits to illness.
Though Peter had profound questions
around the nature of reality from a very early age,
his path to greater understanding of the healing process
began when, by a series of serendipitous events,
Peter was invited to study under the protective wing
of a high order lama in Nepal.
(calming music)
Your journey started as a child,
your experiences with, as I understand,
healing with your hands but not knowing
that's what you were doing?
It actually started a little before that.
Somebody told me about the idea of infinity.
I couldn't figure that out.
Something never began, never end.
I thought about that.
Then one day I decided I was gonna try to go
where that place was, and I had no context.
My friends, I couldn't talk to them about it.
I didn't even know this was an odd thing,
so I would occasionally close my eyes
and try to go someplace that never began or ended.
I don't really know how long it took,
but after some months, one day I got there,
and I went "Oh, is that what that is?"
And then I kind of forgot about it,
but somehow that experience of infinity,
of, what I later would describe as non-duality,
kind of dropped into me and became a part of me,
and whenever I would see that word infinity,
or I would get this concept of something that was just
endless, and infinite, and good at the same time,
I would know that there was something for me.
Shortly after that, whenever I would see somebody
in pain, or hurting, or uncomfortable,
I would just want to put my hands on them.
I didn't realize that this was some kind of healing.
And, quite a few times, they felt a lot better.
And it didn't even dawn on me that I was
actually doing anything other than just offering--
Being nice.
care and assistance.
And, of course, I went through the playing doctor stage
which was transformative in my interest in healing,
but that's a whole other show, I think.
(laughs) Right.
Probably a different channel.
So, I didn't really have any ideas
of what being a healer would be like
other than being like a regular medical doctor,
and that didn't seem interesting to me at all.
And around 15, I started to realize that there was
something I was looking for.
I'm sure many of your listeners have experienced
that kind of gnawing sensation that
something's missing, something important,
something meaningful, something that is believable,
and yet, transcendent, and we didn't even
have that word at the time.
So, I started to look in philosophy and it wasn't there,
I looked in music, and it was sort of there,
but it wasn't really there.
I tried drug, sex, and rock and roll hoping
that would be it, but it really wasn't it.
But for moments at a time, perhaps?
A lot of good moments.
The late-sixties were fun, but in the midst of that,
I began to discover Asia, Asian philosophy.
My dad was actually born in China.
My grandparents were missionaries there
and started a college way back in 1910
or something that's still going in China.
So, I thought I was being rebellious,
but really, it sort of fit the genetic momentum
in a certain weird way, and then I began
to learn meditation when I was 18.
And we had to stop smoking marijuana
to take the TM thing, which was big,
so that was like a whole other dimension,
but it was interesting, the guy that taught me my mantra
had a blue blazer and a red tie, and I thought to myself,
"Well, here I am. I'm taking the transition
from this ancient wisdom from this
very straight-looking guy in a preppy outfit."
Right.
But, somehow, that lineage passed to me,
and I began to practice meditating,
and although I wouldn't do it all the time--
I would have years where I lived in ashrams
and spiritual communities and then I'd come
back out into the world, and I learned
various kinds of healing.
I began to study acupuncture in my early 20s,
and it became very important to me.
And you spent a good amount of time in Asia
studying, as you said, you alluded to a moment ago,
many different healing modalities.
Can you go a little bit more into your time
in Tibet and Nepal?
Okay, that actually came later.
I didn't really go there until I was 35.
And one day I woke up and said,
"You know, my family's been to Asia,
I practice Asian medicine, I teach it.
I have to go to China."
Oh, maybe we should jump back a little bit, 20 to 35.
How did you--
you said you became certified at that point in acupuncture
which you'd been doing many years.
Yes, I started doing healing in my early 20s,
and I did body work, I went to acupuncture school,
I lived with a Taoist priest in the mountains
of Malibu of all places, and was sort of immersed
in learning energetic medicine and
getting deeper into meditative experiences,
and also beginning to trust perceptions
that were sort of out of the material.
So, that brought me to a strong interest in the physiology.
What was happening in the Asian medical systems,
because the West didn't really have good models.
I'd worked in regular hospitals and psychiatric hospitals
and regular hospitals and I just didn't see the people
that really knew what they were talking about.
They were getting medicines and administering care,
but the people, their soul wasn't getting better,
their hearts weren't opening.
You know, perhaps some of the symptoms
were being abated, but the essence of them
as a person wasn't being brought out
and I, somehow, had an intuition that
that's what we needed to find.
That's what interested me about Chinese medicine;
it had a sense of the soul and the spirit of transcendence.
This was sort of lost in mainland China
because, in communism, the state evolves,
the person doesn't.
So, much of the magic and the transcendent
part of Chinese medicine and that whole interaction
between spiritual physiology and medical work
got lost and became very Westernized.
But there were lineages that were kept alive in China
that I later got to study with and, of course,
in Taiwan and also some in the United States
were teaching in the California area at that time.
And you were practicing acupuncture
during this entire journey, so to speak?
I began practicing probably
in my mid to late 20s.
I was actually practicing before I went
to acupuncture school.
I had worked at UCLA at the pain control unit,
and I had been doing body work,
and the guys there just go "Here's some needles.
Go try it."
So, they showed me how to do it,
and I could already feel the points,
and I could sense them and I could
kind of feel the points that I wanted to do,
and so I began to experiment myself,
and I didn't die, I didn't spurt blood anywhere.
So, I began to try it on selected patients that
they knew that I didn't really know that,
and I started to see some miraculous results.
It was easier, quicker.
My hands didn't ache when I got up in the morning,
because sometimes we'd do very long
body work sessions.
So, I saw there was something here.
And they had a very rich theoretical tradition
that, again, brought in the spiritual
and where the spiritual met the physical
through the aspect of physiology.
That was very important to me.
So, at what point did you--
you say you were 35 years old when you
finally decided to go and live throughout Asia for a while.
Can we talk about that part of your journey
and your discoveries?
Yeah, it was interesting.
I decided to go to Asia.
I was practicing up in the wine country in Sonoma,
gave up my practice, then I went to Monterey
for the summer to study Chinese,
and I'd been interested in Tibetan things,
I'd done retreats and studied with teachers,
but I never made a commitment.
And I'd either sold or given everything away,
or put a few things in storage,
and in this house I rented,
there was a stack of books on Tibetan Buddhism.
So, I would study Chinese eight, ten hours a day,
and just for relief, I would start reading these books
on Tibetan Buddhism.
It was a very rarified situation for me.
I found myself making prayers,
just take me to the next level, wherever it is.
And one day I was meditating, and I saw a face.
A face appeared to me.
And turned sideways and disappeared.
The next day I got a letter saying
all my plans to go to Shanghai were up in the air,
so I decided I'd go to Taiwan.
I went to Taiwan, my first day there,
I got up, went to the Palace Museum,
and two Tibetan lamas walked down the stairs
just as I exited the taxi.
I didn't even know who they were,
but they put this bug in me, I got to find some lamas.
So, about six weeks later, I was in Kaohsiung,
Southern Taiwan, and I got a call from
this old Chinese lama that had studied
in Tibet for many years.
"You want to meet some lamas? I'll be at your house.
Where do you live? Oh."
Five minutes later, he pulled up in a taxi
in front of this place I was staying,
took me two blocks away.
When I walked in the house, and in Taiwan
the first floor is kind of like a garage,
there was a picture on a desk and I thought,
"Wow. That looks like the face I saw."
But it had glasses and a ceremonial headdress.
and I said, "No, no, no. They all look alike."
I just didn't want to go there.
But we went upstairs, we went into the room
where one of these lamas from Nepal was,
a Tibetan lama, and on the table was the exact face
that I had seen in this vision.
Well, I had already set up this thing to study
at the brand new Chinese medical hospital
in Kaohsiung, I'd been on Chinese television,
and he said, "Oh."
I said, "I know this person."
And he said well do you want to come with us,
so I said okay.
'Cause I knew that if I didn't go, I'd always wonder.
So, ten days later with a plane full of
Taiwanese Tibetan tourists, that all knew the story,
we went to Nepal, and I met my teacher
with all them kind of looking over,
and that was the beginning of that,
and he turned out to be
a profoundly accomplished lama.
He had done over 40 years of solitary retreat.
He'd never accepted a Westerner before,
and he gave me a room next to his
in this small little monastery that he had,
even though he was a very high lama.
And so, that was the beginning.
And about three weeks later, I finally said
well, Rinpoche, how about some teachings?
So, finally he said okay.
So, I went there and I got this transmission,
and at the end, I was really in my ego
and really in my head 'cause I had seen this teacher
in a dream, and I said, "Rinpoche,
I'm kind of an advanced meditator,
how about something really advanced
'cause I know I'm ready for that."
My private parts cringe as I say this today.
So, he turned away for a moment, and he said,
"Well, what is the nature of mind?"
And I thought to myself, "Oh, I know that."
But you don't know the nature of mind, you know?
So, when I turned back he had no head.
There was this big black hole where his head was.
And that was the beginning of my training.
I bet.
That was the beginning of my realization
of where you can go and where I wasn't.
And once you establish that,
then your ability to heal changes
because you're not healing from myself as Peter.
You began to realize that there's this
whole transcendent world that's beyond
our conceptual mind, beyond what we thought.
Now I had done energy work before
and I'd had intuitions about things,
but this was different.
And so, for the next two years, I treated most
of the high lamas in the Nyingma and Kagyu tradition.
And this was profound experience that
I didn't really even understand at the time.
In Chinese medicine when you take the pulse,
you can feel what's going on.
In simplest, you can feel the organs
and you learn to feel the emotions,
and then you can begin to feel the karmic
predicament as your view gets bigger.
When I first took my teacher's pulse,
there was a quality that I couldn't even get at all.
I couldn't even relate to it, and I thought
I was good at the pulse.
And over the next 10 years, I would feel
that quality in various lamas' pulses--
I'm gonna skip ahead but then
I'll come back and tie it together.
And about 10, 12 years later,
there was this great lama that had come
to the San Francisco area to teach,
and he just filled the whole room with light.
The translator had no idea what he said,
but everybody just got zapped in this altered state.
And I went to his house, and he said,
"You're my student."
And he put his hand on me and just this
streaming energy went through my body
and he said, "Here, take my pulse."
And I took his pulse, and I understood enlightenment.
All the teachings came into line,
I understood the momentum and what it meant,
I understood that, from the inside out,
that we all are enlightened, and it's the
occlusion of our concepts, the occlusion of our fears
and desires, and familial momentum of our family,
and all the contextual stuff from our culture,
that that occluded it.
But there was this fundamental place of being,
and everything I've done really from that moment,
is to reengineer what healing was
based on the model of enlightenment,
based on the model of purity of being,
that we're trying to let come through
that there is nothing to get, nothing to have,
nothing to do.
It's just allow this to be experienced through it.
So, that's really, since then, I've worked to integrate
what that meant, to bring that through and,
from the time I met my teacher to that time,
I had studied in China with Taoists,
and done retreats, and done long retreats
in the Himalayas, both in Tibet and up
just south of Mount Everest up in
a little cabin just south of Lukla, kind of all alone,
which was some of the most profound
and, in a way, happiest times of my life,
because it's just pure experience of being,
nothing's pulling you away from that.
So, when I do healing now, it's that sense of
that timeless quality of infinity that I got
when I was a little boy, that sense of what
enlightenment was from the pulse of this lama,
the energy that I realized that I had gotten
through the whole time from all these great teachers.
Me as a fly on the wall, trying to help them
through simple physical things when they were really,
many of them were really at an incredibly
high level of accomplishment.
So, it was a very amazing opportunity for me.
What a story.
And it's real.
Not fictionalized.
Would this be an appropriate time--
let me ask you to jump into the specific subject
that I want to talk to you about, which is
the spiritual benefits of illness
which you're talking about--
Well, it's a funny title because
they actually made me call it--
but, that's what the truth is.
And I've worked in hospitals for years,
I probably treated 60 or 70 thousand people
as an acupuncturist and healer in various ways.
And in the end, it just becomes pattern recognition.
But what you see, is that most of the things
that we call disease is the body trying to get better.
Fever: body's trying to get better.
Pain: it's a message.
Vomiting, pooping, things coming out.
Hysteria, spasm, all these things are a sign
that the body is trying to move from
a stuck state to an unstuck state,
where this enlightened energy is saying
hey, we're alive.
We don't need to be conceptually contained
within the hallmarks of suppressed physiology,
but really we can live, and most of the things
that we call disease, are actually that process.
So, we've turned it around.
That's why I like to come from the enlightenment model,
because there is a sense all of us have this Buddha nature,
all of us have this Christ consciousness,
it's innate, it's the basis of life,
that is what I experienced in that
moment of infinity at eight or nine,
that is what I experienced in the pulse.
And when we all take a deep breath,
after we have sex, after we're too tired to fight it,
there's a moment of clarity and, all of a sudden,
everything let's go and we experience
that infinity of being.
Seeing something beautiful, loving our child,
feeling totally safe for a moment,
this non-duality of infinite being that's
love and pleasure, but without attachment, exists.
If you can walk and breathe, you have that inside you.
What happens when a person receives,
in the Western model, versus the Eastern model,
when a person receives the news that there's
something in their body that is potentially
life-threatening.
First thing, we go to fear.
We go to fear, we switch from a relaxed mode
to sympathetic mode, which means survival.
Energy goes in the head, arms and legs,
it stops the healing mode, it stops the whole sense
of the immune system from functioning,
it's the opposite of where we want to go.
In Chinese medicine, we study the organs,
we see each of the organs has a personality.
Like the heart really has to do with the spirit.
If you talk about the physiology of enlightenment,
and again, enlightenment is a non-linear quantum feel
that all things exist, but I'm gonna talk about
in a very linear way, just a piece of it,
so you get an idea of how this progression goes.
But if you look at the energy system, the chakras
and how that moves into the heart,
what we find is there's an infinite realm
of frequencies that come down through
the crown chakra, through the central channel,
comes into the heart.
Into the heart, there are two little electrical nodes
that vibrate and homeopathically imprint
the nature of our soul's experience onto the blood
and that gets taken through the body.
We have another part in the lower abdomen
called the dantian.
It's an energy transformative process,
part of the Asian system, and the momentum
of our ancestor's gets carried through the kidneys,
into the central channel it kind of comes up.
So, the wisdom of our ancestors on the earth plane
meets the wisdom of our spiritual heritage
that comes down and they meet in the central channel,
the Sushumna, Chong Mai, depending on
what system you're talking about.
So, you have this sense of momentum.
So, you take someone with heart disease,
when we deny our heart, we deny our love,
we deny our spiritual history,
when we deny what we know is true,
and proper microphone functioning,
is keeping my hands away from my chest here.
Little tap there.
Thanks for reminding me.
What we find is people that deny that
have heart disease.
People that are so mental--
A lot of patients say, "Well, I love."
Yes, but you don't feel it in your chest.
You don't feel it in the love organ,
which is the heart.
When you open and feel safe to love someone,
you actually feel that love right here, it's real.
Valentine's Day is actually saying something.
It's reminding you to hear--
heart disease is the process of denying
the experience of our heart.
It's denying the experience of our heart.
When we have kidney disease, you can think of it
in terms of denying the genetic momentum
of our ancestor's, the right kidney has to do
with bonding issues with the dad,
left kidney has to do with bonding issues with the mother.
Take the gallbladder.
I'm just giving you an idea of how this
organ wisdom can happen.
Gallbladder is a yang organ.
All your yang organs, your intestines,
your stomach, urinary bladder,
have impure fluids, and your yin organs
have pure fluids, but the gallbladder is a yang organ.
It's a bag with a pure fluid bile,
which is a brilliant, beautiful
turquoise in its natural state.
So, the body uses the gallbladder to understand
what balance is in the world.
When we make a decision, the body uses
the touchstone of the gallbladder,
to yang or influence balance.
Is this a balanced situation?
When we're taught to deny the truth
of how we see our family or the world,
we calibrate the gallbladder to levels of untruth
by putting stones and gravel in it so that we
calibrate it to the untruth that
we're taught to see as true.
So, gallbladder disease is actually, in most cases,
the up-leveling of the gallbladder,
of the stones trying to pass with the resistance
to seeing the new reality.
So, things we call gallbladder disease
is actually an attempt of the gallbladder to get better.
Passing a kidney stone means we don't need
the blockage in the kidneys anymore.
The kidneys are trying to up-level
to a higher level of frequency.
And so forth, and on and on and on.
So, those are just a few examples
of the signs of illness are really
the signs of transformation, development,
and, I don't know how much time we have
to fit all this in, but there are seasonal influences,
different organs have different seasonal things happening.
Diseases in the summer, they have to do with
opening or transcendence,
maybe issues of the heart not working correctly.
The heart is the time of the summer,
summer's the heart time.
So, you can calibrate certain changes
in the organs of seasonal influences
that are nourishing or suppressing the organs.
There's this whole database of information
that's happening, and all you have to do
is observe it, we all know it.
Late summer is the time of the spleen,
which is neither growing nor not growing.
That there's timeless quality, we go to the beach
in the late summer, August.
Time stops for a while.
That's the quality.
That's the quality of the earth element of the body.
I'm jumping around, but these are--
No, no, you're not actually--
These are some examples of that.
Now, there's two very interesting systems.
And the Chinese system, there's a system
called the Six Divisions where you look at
how things come from the surface
to deeper and deeper and deeper levels.
The deepest level is the Shao Yin layer.
That's the level when the heart
and the kidneys actually meet.
And that's the beginning of this real spiritual experience,
because you've integrated the physical
with the spiritual at the Shao Yin layer.
Now, it's interesting, a couple years ago
I actually came here to give a talk in another conference,
and I saw an ad for chili con carne
in a paper somewhere, and I realized that carne means meet,
and incarnate means meet, and I realized
that our fundamental spiritual predicament
is to be in the meat.
It's to take all of our spiritual perceptions,
bring it into the body, and body it to earth,
and that's the purpose of being here,
to bring the spiritual into the physical.
And then later, once we get that done,
then we can take the physical back into the spiritual.
From the Christian tradition, you could say
this is how God experiences the creation.
From the Buddhist traditions, it's the integration
into the present, as we breathe, as we learn
to be in the present, as we switch from
sympathetic to parasympathetic,
and we integrate the present into our physiology,
healing happens.
So, it's very interesting how these systems work.
Now, in Germany, in the middle of the last century,
there was a really brilliant physician named Reckeweg,
who looked at--
he was a homeopath and he had developed these formulas
that kind of condensed homeopathic formulas
that he looked at six levels of suppression
of the disease, and this is very important
for what we're talking about.
The first level has to do with normal things.
We spit, we poop, we pee, we sweat,
we have menstruation, we have ejaculation,
we have earwax that comes out,
all the normal things come out,
and these take the toxins out of the body.
When we sweat, chill comes off the shoulders.
A lot of things that we call getting a cold
is actually external cold occluding
the small meridians in the head,
you get chills, fever, runny nose,
these are all signs of invasion by wind.
You sweat, it goes away.
Now, if we don't poop 'cause we're busy,
we don't pee 'cause we're busy,
we don't sweat because we don't want to smell bad
for our date, or all the other things that we hold in.
We hold our emotions in, we hold our tears in,
then the body will create a fever.
When you get a fever, then you sweat,
then you pee or poop, whatever.
Your wife will say, "What are you doing?"
A really great analogy of this is
say we have a hallway in our house,
and I put a bag of laundry or garbage
in the middle of that hallway.
Well, normally you walk by, you take it outside.
So, that would be the first stage, the healthy stage.
The second stage is the inflammation stage,
your wife or whoever lives with you says,
"Get that damn garbage out of the hall."
So, that's the inflammation stage.
The body tries to create inflammation
to further the detox.
So then, if that doesn't happen,
what happens is you push it away.
You push the garbage to the side of the hall,
and you begin to walk by it and it becomes
less important, but the toxicity is there.
Well, those are the first three levels.
Normal release, inflammation, and then
we put things aside.
But once that switches to the fourth level,
then it becomes deeper and deeper,
more deeply impregnated into the system.
We put it inside the closet so we don't see it,
but there's still this biological process of the decay
happening with the toxicity in the closet.
And gradually, the fifth stage is when
the body puts things over that.
And the sixth stage is whenever biological
activities happen, that garbage begins to grow on its own.
This is where cancer, stroke,
heart attack, emphysema, these are the end stages.
Schizophrenia, these are the end stages
of the suppressive pattern that all happens
because we didn't spit, or poop, or pee,
or cry, or ask for what we want.
The life flow.
Life flow, yeah.
So, that's the thing that creates cancer.
That's the thing that creates these end-stages diseases.
So, yet we want to have a war on cancer,
we want to have a war on the garbage in the closet.
You could poison them more.
What happens is you alienate it
from the system even farther.
So, we can see that we have this suppression
into the closet, into the biological process
that creates cancer, all these end-stages diseases.
So, now what happens?
We get some vitality, we take a month off work,
we have our house, we decide to clean house.
We go into the closets and the garage
and clean all this stuff out.
"Oh look, there's garbage there."
So, rather than putting more poison on it to kill it,
we say, "Oh," let's open the door,
let's clean the closet, let's take this outside
through the hall, it smells pretty bad,
we better put it in something, take it outside.
We better rinse the closet out,
we better air the house out, then all of a sudden
we have healing.
It's the end-stage.
A friend of mine, a Taoist teacher,
he thinks that the tumor is actually
a protection against what he calls biolifes
which is a nanobacteria that's even smaller
that he sees in his reality.
So, there's all kinds of ways to think about it.
But the fundamental thing is with these
end diseases that are the problem with our culture,
our culture doesn't want symptoms,
our culture doesn't want to hear emotions,
our culture doesn't really want to hear
the truth about how we think and how we feel.
Our culture just wants to make things quiet,
make things nice, and in that process,
we don't poop when we have to,
we don't pee when we have to,
we don't say the truth when we have to,
we don't sweat, we don't cough,
we don't spit or whatever it is,
then this stuff goes deeper and deeper and deeper.
And then you get into the Western model of medicine
once it goes too deep.
Yeah, but the concept of,
"Oh, you have a fever. Take an aspirin."
"Oh, you're coughing.
Take something to take the cough away."
When coughing wants to bring stuff out of the lungs,
or it shows that the throat is dry,
indefficiency or excess heat.
We can go into either of that.
The whole emotional thing is like
this whole idea of depression.
Depression is, we can say is, suppression.
When I hold my feelings in, I don't function well.
If I'm holding my anger, my hurt in,
all of the sudden there's a big part of me
that's holding in, I have no vitality,
I have no passion, it's not okay
because it's all holding this ball
of hurt inside me.
I'm depressed.
So, give me something to depress me more
so I don't feel it.
You said I'm going to vote republican.
(laughs)
Is that how you have so many republicans?
Actually, we need good republicans,
we need good everybody right now.
I shouldn't really polarize it like that.
Now, going deeper into the contrast of
how we can pull ourselves out.
If most of the people watching this
are in Western cultures, they're working
on a Western medical model, how do we
begin participating in our own healing,
in spite of a system that may not be
helping that much, and pull ourselves out?
Well, we have to ask ourselves the basic question:
what makes me feel good?
What do I like?
What am I drawn to?
What makes me feel bad?
Who in my life am I around that I don't feel good with?
I mean that's the most important question.
How many times do you start a talk and you say,
"Okay, everybody get comfortable."
Half the audience moves.
Why weren't you comfortable before?
We have a right to be happy.
We have a right to feel good.
We have a right to have people around us
that love us, support us, acknowledge us,
help us to be who we are, and then we reciprocate.
If we're in a life that doesn't support that,
you have to ask yourself, "Why am I here?
What am I accomplishing? Why do I have to be unhappy?
Why do I have to be in pain?"
And the answer is, you don't.
And you may not be able to change it
in one day, or two days, or a week, even a year,
but by knowing you have a right to be happy,
you have a right to feel good,
and you can identify I don't feel good in my work,
I don't feel good in my relationship.
I can change my work, I can fix my relationship.
Maybe my husband or my wife needs to heal also,
or maybe we're just not the right combination together,
whatever.
We have a right to start where we are.
Now, if you look at the Buddhist model,
it's very interesting.
They have the Hinayana, Mahayana, Vajrayana,
you don't have to remember those names,
but the first level is, I'm gonna sit still,
I'm gonna learn to be with myself,
I'm gonna learn to be calm and face everything
inside me that keeps me from being calm,
keeps me from being comfortable with myself,
I'm gonna be coherent.
Like Siddhartha said, "I can think, I can fast, I can wait."
That's the beginning Buddhist model.
Getting myself in mind, getting myself clear,
healing myself.
The second level, the Mahayana level,
is a path of the great compassion, the great vehicle.
I can be selfless, but it's a selfless
predicated on a healed self.
If I've giving myself away and I'm not healed,
I'm giving a faulty present, I'm not giving a whole gift.
So, once we heal ourselves and become clear,
then we can be selfless, the self becomes unimportant
because there's nothing left to heal here.
We learn of being selfless, and in service, and all that,
And the third stage is, once I feel clear
in the contraction, once I feel clear in the expansion,
which is selfless, then I can become clear in the dance
of the spiritual warrior, which is the Vajrayana path,
because I'm whole, I'm compassionate,
I'm not holding onto myself,
I'm not holding onto the selfless.
Therefore, when I have enlightened spiritual action
as a spiritual warrior, I have enlightened activity
because it's not reactive, it's expressive from
my Buddha nature or my Christ consciousness,
and that's the difference.
So, if we take a healing model, the first thing is
to find out, I hurt, I'm unhappy.
It's okay not to hurt, and it's okay to be happy.
Start there.
Most of us in our culture, we give ourselves away.
We take care of ourselves, we don't listen to ourselves,
we're trying to heal others and, in a way,
we're not really serving them or us.
And we even give our two week vacations away.
Yeah, in Germany they get six weeks.
I'm sure Cheney gets nine weeks, whatever.
But it's a sign of an ill culture that doesn't value this.
It's the sign of an ill culture
and we don't acknowledge the family.
Many cultures in the world, they know who they were,
they know where there land is.
Twenty years ago, we didn't have Thai food.
Twenty years ago, we didn't have the religions that we have.
Twenty years ago, we probably lived somewhere else.
Our culture's in flux.
Now, this is a good thing, because it allows us
to break the patterns, to open up
to new possibilities, and when the dust settles,
we'll find new paradigms that allow us
to live in ways that we want to live
and feel better as humans, because through the wars,
through the corporate mentality,
through the difficulties that have created the changes
in this country and the world--
we're going from an isolated, small, village culture
to a global culture, we're not there yet.
We're experimenting, we're getting new ideas,
things are opening and releasing.
The old is kind of falling away.
I mean, the corporate mentality isn't working.
Even they're looking at green possibilities
'cause that's what works.
So, in the midst of all this chaos and unsettlement,
people begin to find themselves,
they begin to find others that feel right with them,
we begin to have new kind of communities,
we get a sense that we can feel whole,
we can solve the problems, we can bring this
enlightened nature to function in the world
in a really healthy and happy way.
And that's the fundamental healing,
and in that milieu, we don't have schizophrenia,
because the personality doesn't have to
break through something obstructed
to find a new way.
We don't necessarily have these end-stages diseases
because we've gotten to be ourself and be in our truth,
and all the way along the way,
we don't get there most of the time.
And we really need to start with the way
we raise our children.
Oh, absolutely.
Get 'em off to the right place.
If I don't know myself, how can I be myself
with my child?
If I don't feel safe and experience love and vulnerability,
how can I have love and vulnerability with my child?
I spent about 10 years looking at the energetics
of wounding, bonding, and intimacy.
What I discovered--
'cause when my first marriage broke down,
I looked at the physiology of all these
different relationship systems trying to
understand what I couldn't hold.
It was like trying to hold water in your hand.
I couldn't hold it.
What I looked at was,
energetically, we have--
just like a magnet, North and South Pole--
we have a North and South Pole in our body.
Our spine you can say is the North Pole,
up the front is the South Pole,
yin and yang polarities in the body.
When we have a healthy, happy, integrated
well-bonded family, we have a full polarity
on the front and back.
When we have a bonding issue with our
opposite sex parent, little boy with mom,
little girl with a dad, we switch to the spine
and we become more cerebral, more defended,
less connected internally, we become a red state.
That would be the characteristic of that.
But when we have a same-sex bonding issue,
little boy with his dad, little girl with his mom,
we go away from the spine toward the front,
we become more touch-feely, we become more
feeling-centered, more intuitive,
but it's harder to get that out in the world.
We become a blue state.
Obviously this is just a characterization,
but that's the concept.
So, what I realized was that when we do
meditative practices, Qigong practices
to begin to open these polarities,
it shifts the whole paradigm of how we are in the family.
This is the physiological basis of lack of bonding,
lack of being present for our children.
And bonding happens in physical, emotional,
mental, and spiritual levels, so a parent has to be there,
that's probably a whole other tape,
but there is a physiology that I figured out to all this.
So, it's very interesting, it's not out there.
There's really pieces of the puzzle
that you can identify that are missing
or shifted and you can re-shift them,
and then very positive things happen.
Well, we'll have to do a part two on that one day.
Yeah, I'd like to do that.
Absolutely.
So, to summarize, the dance between
the East and the West, and what
one may have to teach the other,
or is this one way?
No, it's not one way.
It's like the blind man and the elephant.
I see a tree, or I see a mountain, or I feel a snake.
It's the same; it's all part of the same body.
And it's not just the Western physiology
and Eastern model, there is higher energy levels,
and there's deeper levels, but it's all part
of the same human.
And the more we include all the different aspects
that we can know and discover,
then the bigger picture we get.
When you really put the Eastern model
with the Western model, you have a model of psychology.
you have a model that we can understand
better ways to do education, better ways to do law,
better ways to do healing,
better ways to construct community,
better ways to do architecture,
because we understand the needs
and the foibles that makes us human,
and that's what I find so positive,
and so amazing.
The world is a miracle.
We forget that,
but when you look what's here, we are a miracle.
We live that every day, and when we think
our world is mundane or boring,
it means we've lost the conception of ourself,
we've lost the feeling of life and creation
and our Buddha nature inside ourselves,
and that's the main disease, and the main
healing is discovering it again.
Peter Fairfield has also worked with
Harry Oldfield's technology and watch
the auric fields of his clients shift in real time
as a result of his hands-on care.
To take a look at this piece of the story,
click on the link to our interview with Harry Oldfield.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(calming music)